NXP S32G274A
============

S32G2 is an NXP vehicle network processor combining ASIL D safety, hardware
security, high-performance real-time and application processing and network
acceleration. S32G2 supports the needs of new vehicle architectures:
service-oriented gateways, domain controllers, zonal processors, safety
processors and more. It is equipped with 4 Cortex-A53 cores operating at
1.0GHz.

The TF-A includes support for one single S32G2-based board called S32G274ARDB2.
The S32G-VNP-RDB2 is a compact, highly optimized and integrated board
engineering for vehicle service-oriented gateway (SoG), domain control
applications, high-performance processing, safety and security applications.
More details about this board can be found at `s32g274ardb2`_.

Boot Flow
---------

::

   BootROM -> BL2 (SRAM) -> BL31 (SRAM) -> BL33 (DDR - TODO)

.. warning::
   This boot flow is a preliminary version that will serve as a foundation for
   upcoming S32G2 contributions. The execution will hang after the BL31 stage
   due to U-Boot being deployed in SRAM instead of DDR. This issue will be
   resolved with the addition of the DDR driver.

Code Locations
--------------

- Downstream TF-A:
  `link: <https://github.com/nxp-auto-linux/arm-trusted-firmware>`__

- Downstream U-Boot:
  `link <https://github.com/nxp-auto-linux/u-boot>`__

- Downstream Linux:
  `link <https://github.com/nxp-auto-linux/linux>`__

How to build
------------

The port currently available on the S32G274ARDB2 platform is in its initial
stage. This means that important drivers like DDR and storage are not yet
available. Consequently, the boot process depends on BootROM to load all TF-A
stages in SRAM. To create a bootable image, the script below should be used.
This script makes use of the ``mkimage`` tool, which is part of the U-Boot drop
for S32G274A SoCs.

.. code:: bash

        #!/bin/bash -xe
        TF_A="${TF_A:-`pwd`}"
        UBOOT="${UBOOT:-${TF_A}/../u-boot}"
        DEBUG="${DEBUG:-1}"

        FIP_BASE="0x34100000"

        if [ "${DEBUG}" -eq "1" ]; then
                BUILD="debug"
        else
                BUILD="release"
        fi

        BOOT_IMAGE="build/s32g274ardb2/${BUILD}/BOOT_IMAGE.bin"
        BL2_BIN="build/s32g274ardb2/${BUILD}/bl2.bin"
        FIP_BIN="build/s32g274ardb2/${BUILD}/fip.bin"

        # Generate bl2, bl31 and fip image
        make -C "${TF_A}" -j9 'PLAT=s32g274ardb2' \
                BL33="${UBOOT}/u-boot-nodtb.bin" DEBUG="${DEBUG}" clean
        make -C "${TF_A}" -j9 'PLAT=s32g274ardb2' \
                BL33="${UBOOT}/u-boot-nodtb.bin" DEBUG="${DEBUG}" bl2
        make -C "${TF_A}" -j9 'PLAT=s32g274ardb2' \
                BL33="${UBOOT}/u-boot-nodtb.bin" DEBUG="${DEBUG}" fip

        # Extract BL2 entry
        BL2_START="0x$(poetry run memory -p s32g274ardb2 -b debug -f | \
                                grep BL2 | awk -F'|' '{print $3}' | xargs)"
        # BL2 bin file size in bytes
        BL2_SIZE="$(stat -c "%s" "${BL2_BIN}")"

        # Pack bl2.bin and fip.bin by ensuring that the FIP image will start at FIP_BASE
        cp -vf "${BL2_BIN}" "${BOOT_IMAGE}"
        dd if="${FIP_BIN}" of="${BOOT_IMAGE}" seek="$((FIP_BASE - BL2_START))" bs=1

        # Build a bootable image by appending the IVT
        "${UBOOT}/tools/mkimage" \
                -a "${BL2_START}" \
                -e "${BL2_START}" \
                -T s32ccimage \
                -n "${UBOOT}/u-boot-s32.cfgout" \
                -d "${BOOT_IMAGE}" \
                fip.s32

.. _s32g2: https://www.nxp.com/products/processors-and-microcontrollers/s32-automotive-platform/s32g-vehicle-network-processors/s32g2-processors-for-vehicle-networking:S32G2
.. _s32g274ardb2: https://www.nxp.com/design/design-center/designs/s32g2-vehicle-networking-reference-design:S32G-VNP-RDB2
